# Breast Cancer Prediction

## Abstract
Background: Breast cancer is the second most severe cancer of all of the cancers that exist. Studies show that 1 in 8 U.S. women develop breast cancer throughout their life. Early detection and diagnosis of breast cancer is crucial to ensure that proper treatment can be received at the right time. When diagnosing breast cancer, a suspicious lump is examined to determine whether it is cancerous or not. This is done by checking certain characteristics of the lump like its area, radius, perimeter, etc. Based on these, the oncologist can determine whether the lump is cancerous and if so, start treatment immediately to ensure that it does not spread. Objective: There is a need to predict whether cells are cancerous or not with high sensitivity. Machine Learning not only offers an alternative approach to the status quo but could also be able to overcome the limitations of the current methods and improve the accuracy and sensitivity of prediction. The overall objective is to develop a model using machine learning algorithms to predict whether a lump or tumor is cancerous or not with high sensitivity. Methods: We have used a Breast Cancer dataset from the University of Wisconsin Hospitals which has been made available on Kaggle. After many preprocessing steps (Splitting data into test and train set, feature construction and feature selection), we trained different models using supervised learning methods like Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Neural Networks, XGBoost and Bagging using the training set. We then evaluated the performance of these models on the testing set using various evaluation metrics like accuracy and sensitivity. Results: overall a high sensitivity model was able to be developed, with the highest sensitivity from a multi-Layered Perceptron model providing a sensitivity of 0.962. The lowest scoring evaluation metric as the specificity, which was concluded to be acceptable as the focus of the study is maximizing the true positive rate.

## Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in women and has the second highest mortality rate. This type of cancer occurs almost entirely in women; however, men can get breast cancer too (American Cancer Society, 2019). Breast cancer cells usually form a tumor that can often be seen on an x-ray or felt as a protruding lump. After a suspicious lump is found, imaging procedures are performed, and the images are analyzed by a radiologist to search for tumors in breast tissue. Once found, tumors are classified as either malignant or benign which determines if the patient is diagnosed with breast cancer or not. We propose the integration of machine learning algorithms to predict whether a lump is cancerous or not based on its shape characteristics. The integration of machine learning can be especially useful as it can provide opportunities to make consistent, accurate results. Models can be developed using supervised learning methods like Logistic Regression, Neural Networks, and Decision Trees. These models can be trained on data which contain the shape features of different tumors and the corresponding , and can then classify new tumors as malignant or benign based on the attributes of the tumor. In this study, the overall objective is as follows:

**Develop a model that is able to correctly predict when tumors are malignant or benign with high sensitivity**.

The reason for demanding a high sensitivity from the model is due to the fact that the repercussions of the model indicating that a malignant (cancerous) tumor is benign (non-cancerous) are more severe than if a benign tumor was classified as malignant. Early detection of breast cancer can be the difference between life and death., so it is very important to have a model that can accurately classify tumors as malignant with very low error rates. In this project, we are going to predict whether a person has cancer or not given the characteristics of the tissue being examined.

## Data
### Dataset
The features of the dataset are listed in Table 1. They were computed from the digitized image of a Fine Needle Aspiration (biopsy) of a breast mass, shown in Figure 1 of the Appendix. The Breast Cancer Prediction Dataset: v.2 provided by [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/merishnasuwal/breast-cancer-prediction-dataset) (2018). From these images, the shapes and other characteristics of the tissue under observation are recorded. The dataset contains 596 rows and 6 columns (5 describing the characteristics of the tissue under observation and one column corresponding to the diagnosis). The mean, standard deviation, maximum, minimum and quartile values for the first five columns (the predictors) are given in Table 2.
